# Helper documentation for bulk genomes uploads to ENA sequence repository 

The TCCP produced multi-FASTA assembly files with about 1K-3K sequences which is technically identical to genome assembly files. The diplotype files produced by TCCP would require extra effort to upload as they have long string of N in hard masked low coverage area of assembly. Procedure below assumes you already establish webin account with ENA. Check official documentation page for this step [Register a Submission Account]( https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide/registration.html) 

# Stage 0 Registry your new project on ENA webin. 
Follow interactive menu and enter information about your study. This will create a record for the project id, which will be rooting bunch of samples you will later add with sample_xmler.pl script.

# Stage 1: Prepare biosamples entries [sample_xmler.pl]
Biosample records contains information about your sample specifics and will link this sample metadata to the project id (stage 0) and later the sequence assembly fasta file. Following steps will be required to run sample_xmler.pl  
# 1.1 Collect metadata in single tab delimited metadata.txt file. 
Metadata file can have arbitrary number of fields (columns) but there are following obligatory columns which you have select interactively with perl script.
1)	Sample ID/NAME  --  should match beginning of assembly file name. I recommend use BPA sample ID here. 
2)	TAXON_ID  -- note this should be exact species identifier from NCBI taxonomy database. Genus or any other than species  taxonomy level are not allowed here. 
3)	Scientific name  --  genus and species id it could be combined from two columns 
4)	COMMON_NAME  -- for ordinary humans
There are some optional columns with geographical information which will be parsed and coded automatically, if you will keep header names like those:
•	country
•	state|region|state_or_region
•	collection_date
Here is example for two samples in metadata.txt file.

# 1.2  Run sample_xmler.pl script to convert meta 

You have fix those variables in script before running (sorry no interface for those yet):
$investigationtype     = "phylogenetic study";
$sequencingmethod      = "Illumina SBS, short PE reads";
$bioprojectaccessionid = "PRJEB00000";     #Registry project online manually prior to generating those XMLs (stage 0)

Script should produce set of XML files ready for upload to ENA
# 1.3 Prepare submission.xml
This small extra xml file with action details can be done manually. This file should have following lines:
\<\?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?\>
\<SUBMISSION>
\   <ACTIONS>
\      <ACTION>
\         <ADD/>
\      </ACTION>
\   </ACTIONS>
\</SUBMISSION>

You can change  \<ADD/\> to  
\<MODIFY/>   ## For update existing sample. This is convinient to upload new version of assembly.
•	<HOLD target="TODO: study accession number" HoldUntilDate="TODO: YYYY-MM-DD"/>
•	<RELEASE target="TODO: study accession number"/>
•	<RECEIPT target="submission alias or accessions"/>
•	<KILL target="TODO: object accession number"/>

More options [here](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide/programmatic.html)

# 1.4 Upload with curl
Curl is sftp client program need to be pre-installed on the system. To upload generated XML files use curl command:\n";
ncurl -u \'username:password\' -F \"SUBMISSION=@submission.xml\" -F \"SAMPLE=@sample.xml\" \"https://wwwdev.ebi.ac.uk/ena/submit/drop-box/submit/\"";
Note you have to change: wwwdev.ebi.ac.uk ---> www.ebi.ac.uk  for the real upload. Otherwise it will live there only for 24hrs.";
# 1.5 Collect receipts from submission  
You have to compile all receipts for generated by biosample submission to single table. If you miss receipts you can login to your account and download sample ids table manually from there. 

# Stage 2 Submit assembly files [manifestator.pl]
In stage 1 you created database entries for biosample ID. Now we need to create manifest files for assemblies using generated biosample ID with MANIFESTATOR.PL. To upload one assembly fasta you will require require 2 files: 
1.	Manifest file      #Text with sample IDs married with fasta file name.	 
2.	FASTA file	       #For unannotated assemblies (plain multi fasta // all exons in the same fasta file).
# 2.1 Prepare manifest_meta_table.txt
This is another metadata tab delimited text file with few number of columns. This is file may have only those columns:
1)	BPA sample / library id
2)	Biosample sample ID
3)	Biosmaple alias ID
4)	FASTQ file name
5)	Coverage (sequencing depth, from TCCP QC metrics)

10001   ERS0000001      SAMEA0000110    10001_AHGVYVBCX2_GAATCTC_S19_DD.fasta.gz    127
10002   ERS0000011      SAMEA0000111    10002_AHGVYVBCX2_GAGGAC_S21_DD.fasta.gz     88
10003   ERS5079562      SAMEA0000112    10003_AHGVYVBCX2_GATTCTC_S33_DD.fasta.gz    87

# 2.2 run manifestator.pl
This script will take manifest_meta_table.txt table ind split it to individual manifests. Those manifest files will be named by ID in the first column of metadata (manifest_meta_table.txt). The example of produced manifest file (10001.manifest): 

STUDY    PRJEB00000
SAMPLE   SAMEA0000110
ASSEMBLYNAME    ERS0000001 MarsupialExonCaptKit
ASSEMBLY_TYPE   isolate
COVERAGE         127
PROGRAM "TCCP (docker: trust1/ubuntu:OMGv001)"
PLATFORM         illumina
MINGAPLENGTH    50
MOLECULETYPE     genomic DNA
FASTA   10001_AHGVYVBCX2_GAATCTC_S19_DD.fasta.gz

Where:
PRJEB00000 – project id the root project information you may have to add manually online when you registry dataset. 
SAMEA0000110  -- Sample identifier could be taken either from XML submission recipt (the log file) or downloaded from the ENA biosample summary  page for the bioproject. Hint: if you miss those sample ids you can rerun xml submission (see # 1.3 ) with modified “submission.xml”          
        <ACTION>
             <VALIDATE/>
         </ACTION>

# 2.3 Submit sequence data with webin-cli-3.1.0.jar
For upload fasta you will need to get submission program webin-cli-3.1.0.jar (or latest) from the ENA site: https://github.com/enasequence/webin-cli/releases

Here is shell command to cycle across manifests and samples:

for file in *.manifest
do echo $file && java -jar webin-cli-3.1.0.jar  \
  -userName Webin-Username \
  -password='somepasswordhere' \
  -context=genome \
  -manifest=/data/local/tmp/$file \
  -inputdir=/data/local/tmp \
  -submit 
done


# 2.4  Collect fasta data ids from reciepts. 
Check receipts for line pattern success="true". Keep receipts in case you may need further work or update those assembly files. Here is example of receipt file:

  % Total    % Received % Xferd  Average Speed   Time    Time     Time  Current
                                 Download  Upload   Total   Spent    Left  Speed
100  7322  100   542  100  6780    345   4323  0:00:01  0:00:01 --:--:--  4666

\<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?\>
\<?xml-stylesheet type="text/xsl" href="receipt.xsl"?\>
<RECEIPT receiptDate=\"2020-09-25T00:38:36.465+01:00\" submissionFile=\"submission.xml\" success="true">
     <SAMPLE accession="ERS0000001" alias="10001" status="PRIVATE">
          <EXT_ID accession="SAMEA0000110" type="biosample">
     </SAMPLE>
     <SUBMISSION accession="" alias="SUBMISSION-25-09-2020-00:38:36:347">
     <MESSAGES>
          <INFO\>Submission has been committed.</INFO>
     </MESSAGES>
     <ACTIONS>MODIFY</ACTIONS>
</RECEIPT>



---

Refer to ENA portal for more detailed documentation about submission [ processes ]( https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/general-guide.html ).
